| <img src="/assets/dipi.png" alt="DIPI Badge" width="150">      | Data Integrity and Pipeline Integration (DIPI) Working Group |
| -------------- | ----------------- |
| **Meeting**    | 03 Slack          |
| **Date**       | 2021-01-08        |
| **Attendance** | SN AU BJ MB WR RP |
| **Away**       |                   |

## Proposed agenda

* Happy new year and all that
* Brief discussion of current development work
* Cardiff development environment update
* Issue with outbound ENA pipeline
* GISAID and proposal for internal data delay
* Proposal to move pipeline timings
* Proposal to add pillar column to post-tree metadata
* Sample geocoding
* Pipeline updates
* Upcoming threats
* AOB

## Previous actions

| Issue | For | Action          | Feedback          |
|-------|-----|-----------------|--------------------|
| [#3](https://github.com/cog-uk/dipi-group/issues/3) | MB | Cardiff testing environment | Short downtime to be scheduled. |

# Discussion

### Happy new year

* SN reports that all pipelines ran smoothly over the holiday period. Nice work to all involved; COG and PHAs were very happy.
Shoutout to RP for tinkering with SLURM right before the break to further enhance inbound pipeline robustness.
* We anticipate to be busier than ever before, so good luck and take care.

### Current development work

* SN deployed new version of post-Elan publishing script that removes around 150 minutes from the total execution time.
This was acheived by updating the Majora API to permit downloading lists of files that are newly added or newly suppressed since the last successful pipeline (determined by resolving the `latest/` symlink) and softlinking those, rather than the entire dataset, every day.
Further improvement will likely be gained at RP's suggestion to move elements of the publishing script to run on the compute nodes which have superior hardware and a faster link to the file system.

### Cardiff development environment update

* MB currently busy with outbreak data but is finished with preparations. Short downtime needed to finish which needs scheduling.
* New system administrator to start in Cardiff who will be able to take on some of these responsibilites.

### Issue with outbound ENA pipeline

* A large site opted-in to ENA uploads before the holiday period, which combined with the recent higher throughput of COG, led the ENA submission pipeline to fall over due to a lack of resources in the pre-pipeline steps.
Although we are a little behind on BAM uploads, the more important sequence submissions have not been affected. SN is taking care of this and expects to be caught up by next week.

### GISAID and proposal for internal data delay

* SN has *finally* been offered API access to help manage consortium sequence submissions. SN plans to look at migrating the sequence submission pipeline to this API over the next two weeks (but it is not a top priority).
As this API will allow us to keep track of sequences and submitted accessions more accurately, we will be able to look at submitting sequences more often.
* As we can now start thinking about sequences more often, SN wants to address the problem where sequences submitted Monday must wait 7 days to be published, whereas sequences from Sunday wait a mere 7 hours.
SN proposes that when we move to daily submissions we introduce a small internal delay (e.g. 24-72 hours) to allow the consortium to catch contaminated or incorrectly processed genomes before they are submitted to public databases - especially given the recent excitement over variants.
    * **No objections**
    
### Proposal to move pipeline timings

* The "knife edge" problem where samples submitted after 12pm will not be integrated downstream until the following day (because they miss the pipeline of the day) has been raised by some Pillar 1 sites.
* SN has been asked to look at what changes could be made to pipelines to include more samples (this will likely involve moving Elan to run at about 4-5pm, rather than 2pm as currently).
    * **No objections to move forward**.
    * **SN to discuss with BJ what time would be optimal to allow for trees to be delivered at a useful time to COG**.
    
### Proposal to add pillar column to post-tree metadata

* AU has requested that **BJ to add sample collection pillar to post-tree metadata**


### Sample geocoding

* AU reports geocoding the public location metadata is difficult given the non-controlled vocabulary for `adm2`.
* Previously the group has been using UTLA but there remain edge cases which are hard to place, AU thinking of moving to ceremonial counties.
    * BJ suggests AU speaks to Verity H. who has been working on geocoding already
    * SN raises possibility of integrating the adm2 cleaning steps into a new pipeline as discussed last year, which could store cleaned `adm2` in Majora directly

### Pipeline updates

* No updates

### Threats

* No threats to report but we note that we continue to be absolutely inundated with samples. No scaling problems (save for previously discussed complexities in tree generation) are expected currently.

### AOB

* SN has been asked to spend some time gathering the requirements for automated Genbank submissions
* RP has added user limits which will be activated on the login node after the next reboot
* A user raised an issue which claimed the metadata table delivered by Elan was truncated. On inspection there was no evidence of this. In retrospect, SN suspects the user had accessed the dated artifact directory directly instead of using the `latest/` symlink, and was possibly trying to use the very latest data as it was being written.
SN has updated the post-Elan publish pipeline to start by setting the permissions of the new dated directory to `700`, and only setting `755` once the generation of the data inside has been finished.

## Action summary

| Issue | For | Action          | Timescale          |
|-------|-----|-----------------|--------------------|
| [#7](https://github.com/COG-UK/dipi-group/issues/7) | SN | Move Elan start time | |
| [#8](https://github.com/COG-UK/dipi-group/issues/8) | SN | Change GISAID submission to use API | |
| | BJ | Add collection_pillar to downstream metadata |  |

