| <img src="/assets/dipi.png" alt="DIPI Badge" width="150">      | Data Integrity and Pipeline Integration (DIPI) Working Group |
| -------------- | -------------------- |
| **Meeting**    | 04 Zoom              |
| **Date**       | 2021-01-27           |
| **Attendance** | SN AU MB WR RP RC JS |
| **Away**       | BJ                   |

## Proposed agenda

* Membership updates
* Introduction and welcome new members: WR RC JS
* Discussion of phylopipe
    * RC short and long term plans to stabilise phylopipe
    * JS cardiff work and aims
    * SN previous work completed with MB and outstanding issues (resource requests, repo availability)
    * DIPI goals for phylopipe and long term ideas
* Development roundup
    * SN ENA/GISAID updates
    * SN New identifier naming scheme
    * MB,JS Cardiff development environment update
* Pipeline updates
    * SN,RP Post-morten SLURM issues Jan 23rd-26th
    * SN Update on change of Elan start time
    * SN Turnaround times
* Upcoming threats
    * SN Large file system `find` threat
* AOB

## Previous actions

| Issue | For | Action          | Feedback          |
|-------|-----|-----------------|--------------------|
| [#3](https://github.com/cog-uk/dipi-group/issues/3) | MB | Cardiff testing environment | Complete |
| [#7](https://github.com/COG-UK/dipi-group/issues/7) | SN | Move Elan start time | Complete |
| [#8](https://github.com/COG-UK/dipi-group/issues/8) | SN | Change GISAID submission to use API | Complete |
| | BJ | Add collection_pillar to downstream metadata |  NA |
| | SN | Chase missing collection_pillar data |  Chased but no longer a priority |

# Discussion

## Special items

### Welcome, membership update

* Welcome to WR (ARTIC developer), RC (phylopipe developer) and JS (Cardiff sysadmin)
* BJ will be taking a step back from pipeline integration for the forseeable but will forever be a DIPI alumnus

### Phylopipe

* RC: Taking over as lead developer of phylopipe. First impressions: Phylopipe is very large: handles GISAID pre-processing, COG data preprocessing, tree building, tree annotation and post-tree analyses. It's really multiple pipelines in one.
    * Short term plan is to begin the process of breaking the pipeline into multiple smaller pipelines. There is already an existing GISAID pre-processing pipeline and BJ had begun extracting some of the other pre-processing steps into a new pipeline with a performance increase. RC is looking to take that work and develop a new Nextflow based pre-processing pipeline that will run independently of phylopipe, allowing some artifacts to be published earlier.
    * Short-to-mid term, RC will be looking for low hanging fruit like slow post-tree functions to reduce effort of tree building.
    * Mid-to-long term goal is to move towards a world where phylopipe focusses on tree building and little else (similar to what had been discussed in DIPI previously).
    * Long-term RC wants to experiment using the well-curated GISAID tree as a starting point and do local post-processing to leverage that as a guide tree for COG.
* JS: New Cardiff system administrator, tasked with porting phylopipe to Cardiff. Not currently attempting to run phylopipe in Cardiff until the codebase has been stabilised. Raises issue that documentation for deploying phylopipe could do with some attention, as well as some hard-coded paths and dependencies. RC is aware of these outstanding issues.
    * Short term plan will be to deploy a stable version of phylopipe in Cardiff once it is ready. RC to help with setup and configuration.
    * Mid term plan to help separate out components, write tests and improve performance.
    * Long term to look to fully containerise the pipeline.
* SN: Previously worked with MB to run phylopipe in Cardiff. Found some low hanging fruit in post-tree processing steps (and sent some patches that were incorporated). Noted that SN and RP have found that phylopipe tends to ask for more resources than it needs, especially for smaller jobs.
     * **SN to help RC adjust the phylopipe resource requirements.**
* Long term SN would like to see phylopipe-derived metadata that is widely useful to be integrated into Majora. Users can then access this metadata through the API rather than relying on phylopipe as a publisher of metadata. RC notes that the phylopipe metadata table is passed from one run to the next which does reduce some of the *de novo* activity, but agrees it would be good to see some metadata stored in Majora.
    * MB raised an issue with changes to lineages and other downstream metadata causing fragmented analysis. SN suggests in future Majora might be able to help address those issues by providing a unified interface to accessing phylopipe-derived metadata (and timestamping, versioning it).


## Standing items

### Current development work

* SN resolved the previous reported ENA problem and caught up with ENA submissions. However, ENA BAM submissions have since been paused sacrificially to allow Elan and Phylopipe to operate more efficiently. ENA BAM submissions will continue once phylopipe has stabilised.
* SN has been looking at automating sequence submissions to the ENA (https://github.com/COG-UK/dipi-group/issues/11)
    * SN and AU have added new fields to Majora and the uploader to capture basic bioinformatics metadata that is required for ENA assembly submissions (https://github.com/SamStudio8/majora/issues/45).
    * SN has sped up the Majora API endpoint that generates metadata tables for submission to GISAID and ENA. This has also been updated with metrics and metadata that are required for ENA assembly submissions.
    * SN successfully submitted a test sequence with the `webin-cli` tool (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ena/browser/view/ERZ1700908) and received some feedback from EBI for future submissions.
* SN had to urgently bump plans to switch over to the GISAID API as the automated email attachments had become too large for the GISAID curators to access. This issue was highlighted by GISAID to SN immediately, who made the requisite files availble to the curators within the hour. SN has developed, tested and deployed scripts to use the GISAID API (https://github.com/COG-UK/dipi-group/issues/8) and our first GISAID API submission was sent and successfully processed on Monday.
    * Some users noted that after the API submission this week, sequences in GISAID had collection dates reported with year-level accuracy. This was filed as a bug but turned out to be expected behaviour when only received dates were available (https://github.com/COG-UK/dipi-group/issues/16).
* MB and JS report that a new SSD storage cluster has been deployed in Cardiff. There are some teething issues related to kernel versions that are similar to what we have encountered in Birmingham before (older hardware struggling to keep up with high I/O causing high network load), but the system will be fine for profiling, development and testing of phylopipe. Some new hardware is awaiting configuration.
* RP reports that storage capacity at Birmingham has been doubled and now has capacity of 1PB. New nodes will be coming online over the next few weeks. Goal to be less reliant on third party hardware for scheduling and compute.
* AU has been working on improvements to Microreact and hopes to incorporate new lineage information soon.
* WR announced a significant update to the ARTIC pipeline will be released soon. Mostly bug fixes and tidying but includes new features such as MultiQC integration. The pipeline is also nicely packaged in conda now.
    * **WR to notify downstream users when the update is available**
    * **WR to notify MB when update is available so the artic-nf pipeline can also be updated**


### Pipeline updates

* Some SLURM turbulence between last Friday (20210122) and Monday (20210125) significantly distrupted operations over the past few days.
    * Root cause was identified to be high load on the SLURM scheduling server which is outside of our control.
    * This load caused the SLURM scheduling server to be less responsive than usual. As both Elan and Phylopipe work by submitting many small jobs, any delay on those submissions will add up quickly.
    * Elan was cancelled Saturday to allow the Friday run to continue. Monday's pipeline also finished several hours after expected due to the submission delays.
    * These issues have been reported to the administrators of the SLURM instance who are looking at potential configuration options that might prevent this happening in future.
    * Elan 20210126 experienced minor delay, but we are satisfied that the turbulence is over.
* Phylopipe has also experienced significant disruption this week.
    * RC reports issues are mostly down to new lineages that need to be integrated into the tree building steps.
    * The tree building is broken down into lineages and additionally there was an issue in selecting the outgroup sequences.
    * RC reports that tree are now being built successfully.
    * Immediate goal is to wrangle phylopipe into stability, then copy operations to Cardiff for further development.
* SN reports the trial run of Elan's new 4pm start time was received so sucessfully that not even a single user complained. The change has now been made permanent (https://github.com/COG-UK/dipi-group/issues/7) and the COG documentation has been updated.

### Threats

* SN highlighted a concern that there seems to be a lot of ongoing discussion with regards to turnaround time in COG. SN and AU had been asked to implement a new field into Majora and the uploader as part of this (https://github.com/COG-UK/dipi-group/issues/12). SN is concerned that requests like this will continue. The group agreed that DIPI's stance is that supporting implementation and use of turnaround time information is not a priority.
* SN raised that several `find` steps that enumerate user upload directories for resolving files to Majora metadata were delayed earlier this week.
    * The root cause was the addition of a new storage node causing heavy I/O on the cephfs metadata servers. Although this problem was transient, it did highlight a potential problem with listing or querying significant numbers of files. SN and RP will try and address this.
    * **SN and RP to discuss alternatives to finding uploaded user files**

### AOB

* SN wants to pass some praise to AU and the Microreact team for how sprightly the Microreact website is, despite the number of samples that have been poured into it.

## Action summary

| Issue | For | Action          | Timescale          |
|-------|-----|-----------------|--------------------|
| | SN | SN to help RC adjust the phylopipe resource requirements |  |
| | WR | WR to notify downstream users and MB when new version of ARTIC pipeline is released | |
| | SN | SN to work with RP to find alternative to find for pre-elan scripts | |
