| <img src="/assets/dipi.png" alt="DIPI Badge" width="150">      | Data Integrity and Pipeline Integration (DIPI) Working Group |
| -------------- | -------------------- |
| **Meeting**    | 07 Show and Text     |
| **Date**       | 2021-03-03           |
| **Attendance** | SN RC                |
| **Away**       |                      |

## Proposed agenda

* Development roundup
* Pipeline updates
* Upcoming threats
* AOB

## Previous actions

| Issue | For | Action          | Update          |
|-------|-----|-----------------|--------------------|
| | WR | WR to notify downstream users and MB when new version of ARTIC pipeline is released | |
| | RC | Discuss update on Phylopipe 2.0 | |

## Special items

No special items

## Standing items

### Current development work

* RC has been working on improvements to `fastafunk` to reduce memory requirements for `phylopipe` steps
* RC has been making good progress on `phylopipe 2.0` and hopes to be able to test it towards the end of this week
* SN has continued working on the stomping issue and has ironed out a few remaining bugs. Aside from resolving the stomping problem for biosamples, the patch will also add basic audit information of who updated which sample fields to the web interface.
    * SN and AU have tested the uploader with the development version of Majora and are satisfied that the current behaviour of the uploader will not change.
    * SN will be deploying the patch to Majora production tomorrow and will liase with FS and CS/RA at PHE and WSI to conduct a live weapons test of the new update API.
* SN met with the DWG yesterday and a plan to move forward on ENA consensus submissions has been agreed
    * PAGs passing the Basic QC (50%) threshold will be published
    * SN will need organise upload of the BAMs for Basic QC (50%) PAGs (previously we used the High QC (90%) threshold), will need to arrange this during "quiet" periods
    * SN needs to hear back from ENA DB team about an issue with the `AUTHORS` field (https://github.com/COG-UK/dipi-group/issues/11)

### Pipeline updates

* A disk failure on Wednesday triggered cephfs to rebalance, causing a significant performance hit across CLIMB-COVID. This rebalance has now completed.
* RC has been keeping `phylopipe` as stable as possible but reports we have effectively hit the limit on feasible tree building. RC has forked `fastafunk` to provide a step to `phylopipe` to filter older sequences from the tree building steps to reduce the time and resources required to build trees. This change was also partly motivated to mitigate restart time after last week's unexpected reboots.
    * As a result of these changes, RC has had to juggle multiple different staged versions of `datapipe` and `phylopipe` which has caused some instability this week, but significant progress has been made towards new pipelines.
* As PHAs rely more and more on the outputs from our pipelines, we need to be able to provide better support to ensure they run to a reasonably reliable schedule. Many members of DIPI have worked unsustainably hard over the past year to keep things flowing, but as we approach the second year of CLIMB-COVID, we cannot continue to work like this with Elan's current timing.
    * Although Elan and friends are robust, a single missed day raises a lot of issues at PHAs. To avoid the situation whereby somebody needs to watch the pipes all night, or ignore them and run the risk of errors occurring overnight and not catching them until morning, we will move the pipeline to run closer to working hours
    * We have agreed with NL to move the pipeline start from 4pm to 6am.


### Threats

* SN investigating slow performance in the Majora API endpoint responsible for adding file artifacts (https://github.com/COG-UK/dipi-group/issues/28)
* A user reported the API responding with a `get returned 2` error when trying to upload a sample record. On inspection, the user had submitted the same sample twice in quick succession; the cephfs rebalance caused slow performance and contributed to a race condition whereby a `LibraryPoolingProcessRecord` was added twice by `get_or_create`. SN removed the offending records manually and the user reuploaded the data without issue.
    * Not escalating this to a threat issue at this time as it appears to be an isolated incident. SN to perhaps research how to avoid `get_or_create` race conditions in future.

### AOB

* The one year anniversary of the first CLIMB-COVID VM is next Saturday (March 13th)
* Congrats to AU who has managed to submit a grant during all this chaos!


## Action summary

| Issue | For | Action          | Timescale          |
|-------|-----|-----------------|--------------------|
| | WR | WR to notify downstream users and MB when new version of ARTIC pipeline is released | |
| | RC | Discuss update on Phylopipe 2.0 | Two weeks (Mar 10) |
| [#31](https://github.com/COG-UK/dipi-group/issues/31) | SN | Move Elan to 6am | Next week |
| [#28](https://github.com/COG-UK/dipi-group/issues/28) | SN | Report findings on file artifact endpoint | Next week |
| [#11](https://github.com/COG-UK/dipi-group/issues/11) | SN | Upload Basic QC pass BAMs | Two weeks |
