| <img src="/assets/dipi.png" alt="DIPI Badge" width="150">      | Data Integrity and Pipeline Integration (DIPI) Working Group |
| -------------- | -------------------- |
| **Meeting**    | 08 Zoom              |
| **Date**       | 2021-03-17           |
| **Attendance** | SN AU WR RC AS       |
| **Away**       | RP                   |

## Proposed agenda

**Special**
* Phylopipe 2.0
* VOC/VUI calls in Elan/Datapipe

**Standing**
* Development roundup
    * Anti-stomping deployed, incident report
* Pipeline updates
    * Elan move
    * ENA consensus plans and what not
* Upcoming threats
    * File add slowness
    * Big payloads
* AOB
    * CLIMB one year

## Previous actions

| Issue | For | Action          | Update          |
|-------|-----|-----------------|--------------------|
| | RC | Discuss update on Phylopipe 2.0 | Testing this week |
| [#31](https://github.com/COG-UK/dipi-group/issues/31) | SN | Move Elan to 6am | Complete |
| [#28](https://github.com/COG-UK/dipi-group/issues/28) | SN | Report findings on file artifact endpoint | Suspect fixed |
| [#11](https://github.com/COG-UK/dipi-group/issues/11) | SN | Upload Basic QC pass BAMs | Almost complete |

## Special items

### Member announcements

* WR will be leaving COG in a few weeks time but will always be welcome as a DIPI alumnus

### Phylopipe 2.0

* Phylopipe 2.0 currently working on a manual invocation and is ready for testing
    * RC adjusting memory limits for tree building nextflow processes, trial and error to balance asking for too little and too much -- using the input FASTA file size and attempt number to scale request
    * Using `veryfasttree` instead of `fasttree` as it is not limited to three parallel threads like its predecessor
    * Phylopipe 2.0 will keep 6 months of sequences and selectively subsample beyond that date to build a backbone of variation
        * May experiment with adding removed sequences to the tree in future with USHER
* RC making sure not to run Phylopipe 2.0 at the same time as Phylopipe 1.0 and hopes to run it on days where Phylopipe 1.0 is not running at the moment
* RC plans to run a few iterations of Phylopipe 2.0 and compare them to the corresponding Phylopipe 1.0 trees
* Phylopipe 2.0 will produces trees with fewer samples but should run in a matter of hours, rather than a full day +
* In the meantime Phylopipe 1.0 continues to run on a stable schedule and is producing trees using the previous 6 months of data (with no subsampling beyond that date)
* RC reports first test of Phylopipe 2.0 should complete today
* RC reports Datapipe is working and stable and continues to provide MSA and metadata to users without issue


### Cardiff

* AS reports work so far has been continued system adminstration work, mostly around cephfs and the Birmingham mirror
    * AS reports that storage at Cardiff is currently smaller than at Birmingham and that SN's storage (containing the Elan artifacts) could prove a problem in the near future
        * SN suggested removing sync of the backup uploads directory that stores a copy of FASTA and BAM as submitted by users as this will not be needed at Cardiff for analysis
* AS has begun documentation and testing of Datapipe with a view to deploy it in Cardiff once the storage tasks have been completed
* AS credits RP for helping to diagnose and change some settings related to cephfs performance issues similar to those previously seen in Birmingham


### VOC/VUI calls

* PHAs are keen for some form of report of VOC and VUI identified in the daily pipelines
* SN has been asked to determine where these operations best fit in the DIPI pipelines
    * SN and RC discussed that this sort of behaviour probably belongs in Datapipe in the long term, but could be placed in Elan for now (ultimately as both pipelines are Nextflow-based moving this responsibility will be quite trivial)
    * RC mentioned a long term plan to look for Constellations in the dataset through Datapipe but nobody is currently working on tooling for this, SN is also interested in this
* SN suggests this would be a good opportunity to determine and demonstrate some best practices for adding this sort of metadata in Majora
* MB has been working on the tool `aln2type` that will likely be what we use to do this (with the variant definitions being developed at PHE), SN will speak to MB about this tool with a view to adding it as a step to Elan


## Standing items


### Current development work

* SN described a data integrity incident that was triggered by the recent launch of the partial update interface for biosamples
    * The root technical issue was that a PHA user was incorrectly allowed to update a special class of "blank" biosamples in Majora. The update caused these blank samples to be validated as complete, and samples made their way into the Elan sample manifest. One sample without metadata was published by Elan after completion
    * The issue was resolved before the next run of Elan and no downstream effects have been reported
    * The full issue is described in a postmortem in the DIPI repository (`postmortems/elan_20210305`)
    * SN added the postmortem was written as an exercise in technical writing and transparency but found the process enlightening as it encourages to think beyond the technical problems -- the root cause in this case is described as a lack of resources leading to a lack of a full documented overview in the various data flows to Majora
    * SN encourages DIPI members to write and submit postmortems for "future terrible things" without blame to the DIPI repository, and suggests following the [Atlassian guidelines](https://www.atlassian.com/incident-management/handbook/postmortems) -- SN can make a template available if this is of interest to anyone
    * RC reported receiving an email about two samples with incomplete metadata and wanted to make sure this was unrelated to the incident described
        * On further inspection the samples appear to be from the USA but have the wrong country in GISAID
* AU's team continues to update Microreact to scale with the size of the data set
* WR has been working on documentation to make sure the ARTIC pipeline baton can be passed on reliably

### Pipeline updates

* SN reports Elan's move to 6am has gone down quite well and improved the quality of life of SN and RP, as well as quality of service
    * RC reports that the change has moved Phylopipe to a schedule that is easier to maintain too
* SN has set off the ENA run submission pipeline to process the backlog of BAMs that meet the 50% basic QC threshold, this should finish by the end of this week -- clearing the way to begin submission of consensus sequences
    * The ENA database team have changed the behaviour of the COGUK Webin account specifically to handle the `AUTHOR` field in a way that can be inserted into INSDC databases -- clearing the final blocking issue on ENA consensus submission
* The cephfs rebalance that was reported finished in our last meeting was not finished, merely "the worst was over", the rebalance continued for a few more days causing significant performance issues on the Majora database at times. The rebalance actually completed at the end of last week.
* RP noticed that the Majora database had grown to a size where it was no longer kept fully in RAM, this has been addressed and Majora performance has improved considerably.

### Threats

* SN previously reported a slowness in the file add API endpoint, this has been rectified. SN assumed a Django `unique_together` model option would generate a corresponding index but that does not appear to be the case. SN added an index to the `PublishedArtifactGroup.published_name` and this appears to have improved the situation.
* SN notes that the payload sizes for JSON returned from Majora to the Ocarina clients is growing exponentially for some queries. This will likely require addressing soon. SN notes that Django has a type of HTTP response that enables data to be streamed to a client, which seems more appropriate for these use cases.

### AOB

* SN noted that it would be nice if there were some documentation somewhere for each of the pipelines and processes (Elan included) that describes their inputs and outputs
    * Members agreed this would be nice to work towards, SN will setup a DIPI website on the climb.covid19 domain as a place to hold this information (away from the more general documentation website)
* CLIMB-COVID turned 1 last Saturday, SN [shared some tweets this week showcasing some interesting statistics](https://twitter.com/samstudio8/status/1371419819107622919)
    * SN explained the graphics are generated programmatically and suggests putting them on a CLIMB/DIPI website to showcase our work
    * SN highlighted one of the graphs contains a count of commits across projects and suggested adding all the DIPI-related projects so that everyone's contributions can be represented

## Action summary

| Issue | For | Action          | Timescale          |
|-------|-----|-----------------|--------------------|
| | SN | VOC/VUI identification in Elan - discuss current plans with MB | |
