| <img src="/assets/dipi.png" alt="DIPI Badge" width="150">      | Data Integrity and Pipeline Integration (DIPI) Working Group |
| -------------- | -------------------- |
| **Meeting**    | 10 Show and Text     |
| **Date**       | 2021-04-14           |
| **Attendance** | SN RC AU             |
| **Away**       |                      |

## Proposed agenda

* Development roundup
* Pipeline updates
* Upcoming threats
* AOB

## Special items

* University of Birmingham is experiencing a network outage today affecting all CLIMB-COVID services. Elan and Asklepian have run as normal today.

## Standing items

### Current development work

* DIPI is tasked to deliver a change to Majora's adm1 field as COG-UK plans to expand to several Crown Dependencies and British Overseas Territories.
    * SN to update Majora and internal pipelines (Elan, outbound)
    * AU to check implications for Microreact
    * RC to check implications for Datapipe and liaise with VH/AT about geography cleaning scripts
    * See https://github.com/COG-UK/dipi-group/issues/50 for further information. TRC (PHW) seems to be contact for this task.
        * SN has asked TRC for some information on what adm2 we might be able to expect as this will be helpful for geography cleaning team to prepare
* SN has deployed a CLIMB-COVID status website to track some basic metrics after the graphs made a few weeks ago for CLIMB's 1 year were well received.
    * Site is automatically generated (https://github.com/CLIMB-COVID/status-generator) and pushed to Github pages https://status.covid19.climb.ac.uk/
    * SN to add graph showing commit history and would like to extend this to all DIPI-related repositories
* RC has patched the Tael MQTT-Client to address the parameter passing issue mentioned in last week's miunutes. Waiting for Elan to run tomorrow to see whether this has worked. See https://github.com/SamStudio8/elan-nextflow/pull/14.
* SN has added raw JSON examples to the Majora documentation website "which will help anyone who decides to roll their own client because ocarina isnt good enough". See https://samstudio8.github.io/majora-docs/?json--raw#biosamples.
    * SN warns against looking at the code that reads the Majora OpenAPI YAML spec to generate the documentation as markdown.


### Pipeline updates

* RC reports Phylopipe 2.0 progress continues. As we meet the invocation taking yesterday's datapipe input is now up to its publishing step, a significant improvement on performance and reliability from phylopipe1.
    * Recent development included overcoming memory issues and diagnosing the USHER issue from last week.
    * Many steps of the pipeline needed to be rewritten to avoid tree handling (e.g. to avoid dendropy steps).
    * As the tree is now heavily downsampled for performance, it is important to add them back in with USHER, but there have been undiagnosed segfaults preventing progress on this. RC has spoken to the developers who suggest it might be caused by irregular symbols. RC has added an additional cleaning step and is hoping this will keep the USHER step stable.
    * Plan is for a weekly large tree (likely built on Edinburgh resources) to be made available, and then daily updates to that tree will be made until the next large tree is available.
* B.1.1.7 has expanded to over 200k sequences requiring further downsampling in Phylopipe2. RC investigating options:
    * FastTree 100 days with no background (similar to phylopipe 1)
    * FastTree 30 days and adding samples back with maximum parsimony
    * FastTree 30 days and adding samples back with maximum parsimony, but additionally placing samples that may not have a unique position in the tree
    * Some other combination forcing all sequences from the last 100 days to be placed in the tree, keeping only unique sequences beyond that age
* During last week's downtime, RC began working on the previously discussed constellation typer: https://github.com/cov-lineages/constellations
    * SN asked how this differs from the work we have been doing with PHE to define and call variants: https://github.com/phe-genomics/variant_definitions
        * RC explained this is not intended to serve as a source of definitions, this is a tool to find properties of interest (which may also happen to include the VOC/VUI definitions). RC suggested there is possibly room to expand the typer to use the YAML format from the PHE repo.
* Elan has been running flawlessly on its dedicated machine, often completing before "normal" working hours begin.
* Asklepian has slowly failed to scale over the past few weeks and SN has reopened the tracking issue on its performance. See https://github.com/COG-UK/dipi-group/issues/17.
    * SN suggests that once the PHA team accepts the change to move to compressed tables (see https://github.com/COG-UK/dipi-group/issues/43) this will reduce file handling time and have a reasonable impact on execution time.


### Threats

Nothing additional to report

### AOB

* SN happy to report that the word seems to be out that DIPI is the place to come and report things to get done, we've recently had a few issues opened on the dipi-group repository from external collaborators and public health agencies.
* SN trialling a new transparency initiative to open an issue each time there is manual intervention on a pipeline to show how much work goes into keeping all our plates spinning. See https://github.com/COG-UK/dipi-group/issues/47.
* SN suggests a formal decomissioning ceremony for the Phylopipe 1.0 End of Life.

## Action summary

| Issue | For | Action          | Timescale          |
|-------|-----|-----------------|--------------------|
| | | | |
