| <img src="/assets/dipi.png" alt="DIPI Badge" width="150">      | Data Integrity and Pipeline Integration (DIPI) Working Group |
| -------------- | -------------------- |
| **Meeting**    | 12 Show and Text     |
| **Date**       | 2021-05-11           |
| **Attendance** |                      |
| **Away**       |                      |

## Proposed agenda

* Development roundup
* Pipeline updates
* Upcoming threats
* AOB

## Previous actions

* Nothing to discuss

## Special items

* Nothing special

## Standing items

### Current development work

### Pipeline updates

### Threats

### AOB


## Action summary

| Issue | For | Action          | Timescale          |
|-------|-----|-----------------|--------------------|
| [#nn](https://github.com/COG-UK/dipi-group/issues/nn) | who | what | when |
