| <img src="/assets/dipi.png" alt="DIPI Badge" width="150">      | Data Integrity and Pipeline Integration (DIPI) Working Group |
| -------------- | -------------------- |
| **Meeting**    | 13 Show and Text     |
| **Date**       | 2021-05-18           |
| **Attendance** | SN AU AT VH          |
| **Away**       |                      |

## Proposed agenda

* Member announcement
* Development roundup
* Pipeline updates
* Upcoming threats
* AOB

## Previous actions

Nothing to discuss.

## Special items

### Member announcements

Welcome to AT (Civet, Pangolin) and VH (geography cleaning)

### New adm1 ([#50](https://github.com/COG-UK/dipi-group/issues/50))

Still waiting on confirmation of signatories. VH confirms adm1 geography cleaning is working for existing samples that were previously submitted as UK-ENG.

### ENA consensus submissions ([#11](https://github.com/COG-UK/dipi-group/issues/11))

* Lacking a willing volunteer from DWG, SN has ported the required `bioinfo_pipe_*` field documentation to the official docs site.
* SN has updated Majora to allow sites to opt-in to ENA consensus submissions but has not advertised this yet
* SN enrolled Nottingham as the second test site (following internal tests at Birmingham) and around 2000 genomes were submitted to ENA/INSDC automatically yesterday
* SN will track the latest submission batch through to INSDC and announce that sites can now opt-in to prospective submissions
* A new issue will be opened in due course to handle retrospective submissions as this will require mass backfilling of the `bioinfo_pipe_*` fields

### Phylopipe2

* At the end of last week RC announced the launch of Phylopipe2 beta outputs to #analytics and encouraged users to test the new artifacts
* RC is away this week on a well earned break, the group passes on a hearty thanks for all the work on Phylopipe2!
* AU has tried out the new outputs and has some issues to investigate when RC returns

## Standing items

### Current development work

* SN is in contact with the technical team at PHE to add compression to the remaining Asklepian output table to reduce disk and network I/O (https://github.com/COG-UK/dipi-group/issues/37)
* SN has been working with FS to add two additional public fields to the PHE secure dataview for sharing sample linkage (https://github.com/COG-UK/dipi-group/issues/69)
* SN has received a reply from PHE in response to some queries about GISAID accessions so can now work to setup automated GISAID submissions for PHE affiliated laboratories (https://github.com/COG-UK/dipi-group/issues/53)
* AT has been working on a new Pangolin branch (https://github.com/cov-lineages/pangolin/tree/newscoring) that will now output pangoLEARN and Scorpio calls
    * AT reports the way versions are reported will cause a breaking change downstream so this branch will be merged next week when RC returns to help co-ordinate
* AT is working on civet3, a ground-up rewrite of civet to improve maintanability and performance.
    * civet3 will use SNP files generated by gofasta, rather than operating directly on trees -- this improves efficiency but also allows civet to work independently from the tree
    * civet3 will also use hashing to reduce operations on duplicated sequences
    * RC will be helping to integrate civet3 to use SLURM to help reduce head node load
* VH has been working on bug fixes in the geography cleaning scripts
    * Greater London correctly recognised as an adm2 in its own right
    * Handling of errant spaces improved
* VH reports that adm information of samples from Northern Ireland are being recoded at source to unify the geography system for all UK-NIR samples
    
### Pipeline updates

* Asklepian 20210514 was corrupted by a file system blip last week, which caused corrupted data to be emitted downstream. SN caught this and re-ran everything before it could pollute the PHE database (https://github.com/COG-UK/dipi-group/issues/74)
    * Additionally a fix has been deployed to prevent a similar issue from happening again
* ENA BAM 20210517 needed manually raising after it got stuck (https://github.com/COG-UK/dipi-group/issues/76)
    * This repeats the issue also observed last week, SN to monitor (https://github.com/COG-UK/dipi-group/issues/73)

### Threats

No new threats.

### AOB

* SN waiting to hear back from Genome Biology
* SN suggests a Zoom meeting next week to catch up and properly introduce new members
* SN will post some mystery items to DIPI members tomorrow...


## Action summary

| Issue | For | Action          | Timescale          |
|-------|-----|-----------------|--------------------|
|  |  |  |  |
