| <img src="/assets/dipi.png" alt="DIPI Badge" width="150">      | Data Integrity and Pipeline Integration (DIPI) Working Group |
| -------------- | -------------------- |
| **Meeting**    | 15 Show and Text     |
| **Date**       | 2021-06-01           |
| **Attendance** | RC AU MB VH SN       |
| **Away**       |                      |

## Proposed agenda

* Development roundup
* Pipeline updates
* Upcoming threats
* AOB

## Previous actions

Nothing to action

## Special items

### New adm1
* No update

### DAs to use CLIMB for sender_sample_id
* Work completed by SN, Majora actual has been updated
* Keep your wits about you and report any odd goings on

### Phylopipe2
* Trees are not perfect but there are no critical issues left to iron out
* One week warning has been issued to downstream users

## Standing items

### Current development work

* RC suggests that Phylopipe2 is ready to be switched to primary use over Phylopipe1, with no objections
* RC and VH report Pangolin switch has happened, RC has updated the DIPI changelog
    * More on outputs here https://cov-lineages.org/pangolin_docs/output.html
* MB asked about adm2 missing from beta Civet output
    * VH suggests a private file that contains the consortium-level data like adm2
* SN has updated Majora to disable past-date checks for samples that already exist to allow existing old samples to be updated (see https://github.com/COG-UK/dipi-group/issues/79)

### Pipeline updates

* Phylopipe1 will likely run for the last time this week


### Threats

No threats to report

### AOB

No AOB

## Action summary

No actions
